Initial draft of P3 release notes (#9832)
dotnet/core: release-notes/10.0/preview/preview3/csharp.md

> # C# 14 updates in .NET 10 Preview 3 - Release Notes

Reviewer: I would add a note at the start or end of each section that we have an incredible place where you can discuss and design the features with us and the rest of hte community, and then link to he corresponding discussions on csharplang.

Author: That was the intent, although I did not have the links yet. Using discussion per our email.

Here's a summary of what's new in C# in this preview release:

- [Extensions](#extensions)
- [Null-conditional assignment](#null-conditional-assignment)
- 

C# 14 updates:

- [What's new in C# 14](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-14) documentation
- [Breaking changes in C# 14](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/breaking-changes/compiler%20breaking%20changes%20-%20dotnet%2010)

## Extensions

> Extensions extend the extension methods you know and love to include support for static methods, instance properties and static properties in Preview 3. Look for even more members to have extension support in the near future!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Extensions just got even more powerful! In Preview 3, they now support static methods, instance properties, and static properties—expanding the capabilities you already know and love. And this is just the beginning—stay tuned for even more extension support in an upcoming release!
```

> Extensions for other member types has been development for a long time because there are a couple of fundamental problems: how do declare extensions and how to disambiguate when more than one matching signature is available. We also wanted to support the new syntax for instance members and ensure that users of an instance extension method didn't need to worry about whether it was declared with the old or new syntax.

Reviewer: Expanding extensions to other member types has been a long-standing challenge, driven by two key questions: how to declare them effectively and how to resolve ambiguity when multiple matching signatures exist. Additionally, we aimed to seamlessly support the new syntax for instance members—ensuring that users of instance extension methods never have to worry about whether they were declared with the old or new syntax. After extensive development, we’re bringing these solutions to life!

> Extensions for other member types has been development for a long time because there are a couple of fundamental problems: how do declare extensions and how to disambiguate when more than one matching signature is available. We also wanted to support the new syntax for instance members and ensure that users of an instance extension method didn't need to worry about whether it was declared with the old or new syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Expanding extensions to other member types has been a long-standing challenge, driven by two key questions: how to declare them effectively and how to resolve ambiguity when multiple matching signatures exist. Additionally, we aimed to seamlessly support the new syntax for instance members—ensuring that users of instance extension methods never have to worry about whether they were declared with the old or new syntax. After extensive development, we’re bringing these solutions to life!
```

Today you may have an extension method that follows the pattern:

```csharp
public static class Extensions

> {    

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
```

    public static IEnumerable<int> WhereGreaterThan(this IEnumerable<int> source, int threshold) 

>             => source.Where(x => x > threshold);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        => source.Where(x => x > threshold);
```

}
```

> The _receiver_ is the parameter prefaced by the `this` keyword - `source` in this case. Property declaration do not have a similar location to declare the receiver. Thus, C# 14 introduces `extension` blocks. These are blocks with a scope that exposes the receive to its contained members. If we switch the `WhereGreaterThan` extension method to the new syntax and add an IsEmpty property the extension block would be:

Author: ```suggestion
The _receiver_ is the parameter prefaced by the `this` keyword - `source` in this case. Property declarations do not have a similar location to declare the receiver. Thus, C# 14 introduces `extension` blocks. These are blocks with a scope that exposes the receiver to its contained members. If we switch the `WhereGreaterThan` extension method to the new syntax and add an IsEmpty property the extension block would be:
```

```csharp
public static class Extensions

> {  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{
```

    extension(IEnumerable<int> source) 
    {
        public IEnumerable<int> WhereGreaterThan(int threshold)
            => source.Where(x => x > threshold);

        public bool IsEmpty
            => !source.Any();
    }
}
```

To use these members, you just call them:

```csharp
var list = new List<int> { 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 };
var large = list.WhereGreaterThan(3);
if (large.IsEmpty)
{
    Console.WriteLine("No large numbers");
}
else
{
    Console.WriteLine("Found large numbers");
}
```

Generics are supported and the resolution rules are the same as for extension methods. For example, you could make `WhereGreaterThan` and `IsEmpty` generic:

```csharp
    extension<T>(IEnumerable<T> source)

>         where T: INumber<T>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        where T : INumber<T>
```

    {
        public IEnumerable<T> WhereGreaterThan(T threshold)
            => source.Where(x => x > threshold);

        public bool IsEmpty
            => !source.Any();
    }
```

The constraint to `INumber<T>` allows the greater than operator to be used.

Static methods and properties don't have a receiver, so the extension block list the type without a parameter name:

```csharp

>    extension<T>(List<T>)

Reviewer: Is this legal @MadsTorgersen ?  I thought we still required the parameter name.  You just won't be able to use it within static extensions.

Author: Yes, that is the current build.

   {
       public static List<T> Create()
           => [];
   }
```

> Our goals included extension blocks coexisting with the many extension methods you may have today. There's no need to change to the new syntax unless you want to - they execute in exactly the same manner. Extension blocks can be added to the static classes containing that contain your existing extension methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Our goal is to allow for extension blocks to coexist with the many extension methods you may have today. There's no need to change to the new syntax unless you want to - they execute in exactly the same manner. Extension blocks can be added to the static classes that contain your existing extension methods.
```

> Our goals included extension blocks coexisting with the many extension methods you may have today. There's no need to change to the new syntax unless you want to - they execute in exactly the same manner. Extension blocks can be added to the static classes containing that contain your existing extension methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our goal was to ensure that extension blocks seamlessly coexist with the extension methods you already use. There’s no requirement to switch to the new syntax unless you choose to—both execute in exactly the same way. Plus, extension blocks can be added directly to the static classes that contain your existing extension methods.

The choice is entirely yours. If you prefer to leave your existing extension methods untouched, you absolutely can. But if you’d rather modernize your code for a consistent look and take advantage of the new syntax, that option is available too. And with tools like Visual Studio, converting to your preferred form has never been easier!
```

Author: ```suggestion
Extension blocks can seamlessly coexist with the extension methods you have today. There's no requirement to switch to the new syntax - both execute in exactly the same way. Just add extension blocks to the static classes that contain your existing extension methods.

The choice is entirely yours. If you prefer to leave your existing extension methods untouched, you absolutely can. But if you’d rather update your code for a consistent look and take advantage of the new syntax, that option is available too. And with tools like Visual Studio, converting to your preferred form has never been easier!
```

You'll see more extensions in upcoming previews, but we'd love to hear your feedback at []().

## Null-conditional assignment

> Null-conditional assignment assign a value to a property or field only if the containing instance exists. Imagine you have a code similar to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Null-conditional assignment assigns a value to a property or field only if the containing instance exists. Imagine you have a code similar to:
```

```csharp
public class Customer
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public int Age { get; set; }
}

public class UpdateCustomer
{
    public static void UpdateAge(Customer? customer, int newAge)
    {
        if (customer is not null)
        {
            customer.Age = newAge;
        }
    }
}
```

You can simplify the `UpdateAge` method:

```csharp
    public static void UpdateAge(Customer? customer, int newAge)
    {
        customer?.Age = newAge;
    }
```

If the customer is not null, `Age` will be updated. If customer is null, nothing will happen.

> The IDE will help you by recommending this change.

Reviewer 2: Is this through lightbulb?

Reviewer: Yes.

> The IDE will help you by recommending this change.

Author: ```suggestion
The IDE will help you by recommending this change via a lightbulb.
```

```csharp
    extension<T>(IEnumerable<T> source)
        where T : INumber<T>
    {
        public IEnumerable<T> WhereGreaterThan(T threshold)
            => source.Where(x => x > threshold);

        public bool IsEmpty
            => !source.Any();
    }
```

The constraint to `INumber<T>` allows the greater than operator to be used.

Static methods and properties don't have a receiver, so the extension block list the type without a parameter name:

```csharp
   extension<T>(List<T>)
   {
       public static List<T> Create()
           => [];
   }
```

Extension blocks can seamlessly coexist with the extension methods you have today. There's no requirement to switch to the new syntax - both execute in exactly the same way. Just add extension blocks to the static classes that contain your existing extension methods.

The choice is entirely yours. If you prefer to leave your existing extension methods untouched, you absolutely can. But if you’d rather update your code for a consistent look and take advantage of the new syntax, that option is available too. And with tools like Visual Studio, converting to your preferred form has never been easier!

> You'll see more extensions in upcoming previews, but we'd love to hear your feedback at []().

Author: ```suggestion
You'll see more extensions in upcoming previews, but we'd love to hear your feedback in the discussion [Extensions](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/discussions/8696)..
```

## Null-conditional assignment

Null-conditional assignment assigns a value to a property or field only if the containing instance exists. Imagine you have a code similar to:

```csharp
public class Customer
{
    public string Name { get; set; }
    public int Age { get; set; }
}

public class UpdateCustomer
{
    public static void UpdateAge(Customer? customer, int newAge)
    {
        if (customer is not null)
        {
            customer.Age = newAge;
        }
    }
}
```

You can simplify the `UpdateAge` method:

```csharp
    public static void UpdateAge(Customer? customer, int newAge)
    {
        customer?.Age = newAge;
    }
```

If the customer is not null, `Age` will be updated. If customer is null, nothing will happen.

> The IDE will help you by recommending this change via a lightbulb.

Author: ```suggestion
The IDE will help you by recommending this change via a lightbulb.

We'd love your feedback on this feature in the discussion [Null-conditional assignment](https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/discussions/8676).
```

# C# 14 updates in .NET 10 Preview 3 - Release Notes

Here's a summary of what's new in C# in this preview release:

> - [Extensions](#extensions)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Extension members](#extension-members)
```

- [Null-conditional assignment](#null-conditional-assignment)

> - 

Author: ```suggestion
```

C# 14 updates:

- [What's new in C# 14](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/csharp-14) documentation
- [Breaking changes in C# 14](https://learn.microsoft.com/dotnet/csharp/whats-new/breaking-changes/compiler%20breaking%20changes%20-%20dotnet%2010)

> ## Extensions

Author: ```suggestion
## Extension members
```
